Lnd plan of attack (#50)
comit-network/spikes: 0022-lnd-plan-of-attack.adoc

= Outline a plan of attack for integrating Lightning into cnd
Thomas Eizinger <thomas@coblox.tech>;
:toc:
:revdate: 2020-01-21
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 5

NOTE: Author: {authors} +
Date: {revdate} +
Tracking issue: https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1838[#1838]

== Context

> We want to allow users to use Lightning for swapping assets.

Reviewer: I think we can mention that this spike only covers LND. 

`HoldInvoice` is also supported by clightning but I we really can ignore this for now and focus only on LND. 

See BitcoinOptech Newsletter: https://bitcoinops.org/en/newsletters/2019/04/16/#c-lightning-2540

. Lightning is not a public ledger, hence our current abstraction of watching a blockchain doesn't fit
. The _standard_ LN as of today doesn't support paying someone who doesn't know the preimage, hence the swaps would only work in one direction (if Bob pays Alice via LN)
. Our current REST API is not capable of the alpha/beta ledger protocol idea

==== Re-use "half the protocol"

Atomic swaps with LN are still HTLC-based, so the other ledger can execute the protocol as currently outlined in RFC003.
The link:./0021-protocol-naming.adoc[protocol naming spike] already did fundamental work here by introducing the concept of a ledger-specific protocol.
This allows us to specify the lightning protocol as a standalone protocol, without having to define, what happens on the other ledger.

==== Messaging protocol

We want to change our messaging protocol for various reasons.
For further detail, please consult the communication protocol spike: https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1827
In the context of this spike, the relevant points are:

- The need for an ledger-specific protocol; the current messaging protocol only allows for a single protocol to be specified

> - Different information needs to be passed around for the HALight protocol; the current message format would make this more complicated than it needs to be as it would increase the polymorphism one level further (different bodies for different protocol combinations)

Reviewer: HALight was not yet introduced. This confused me a bit until I read the rest of the document.

Author: I assumed readers of this spike are aware of all previously written spikes.

Reviewer: That's fine. For the future I would either link to the other spike or shortly introduce the abbreviation here as well.

==== Standard LN does not support payments without the other party knowing the pre-image

There is an experimental feature called "hold-invoice" which we can utilize to design a symmetric protocol.
As a consequence, users will have to compile LND with the feature flag "invoicesrpc" to get the desired functionality.

==== Our current REST API endpoints are not capable of expressing the concept of a protocol per ledger

At the moment, our REST API only exposes the following endpoints for submitting swaps: `/swaps/rfc003`.
All the information is encoded in the HTTP body, which not only complicates the deserialization process but also makes it hard for clients to construct a correct payload.

We can kill two birds with one stone if we choose to not add support for the HALight protocol on the existing endpoint but instead add new ones.

. adding new routes is automatically backwards compatible and downstream projects can adapt them gradually
. the new routes can take a different, less complicated design which aids error messages, deserialization code and client side implementations

The proposal is roughly outlined here: https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1326.

> To start with, I would add the following routes: (bitcoin to LN seems pointless but of course we can still add it)

Reviewer: That sounds a bit harsh :D Imho bitcoin to lightning will be a crucial feature in the future. There are already business offering these things as a service such as https://submarineswaps.org/ 

```suggestion
To start with, I would add the following routes: 
```

Author: Just because there are business offerings doesn't mean it is not pointless :)

Just trying to reduce the scope here but we can ofc add any combination.

Author: BTC to LN is also not cross-chain. We have this discussion at some point and I remember we agreed that it is not a priority for us?

Reviewer: No worries, just thought it is not pointless :)

I'm thinking about various use cases for some time now and how to get COMIT known in a community we feel comfortable with. That's why I'd consider BTC<->LN and USDT<->LN. 
... Ithought I add some more insights in my thinking. Please feel free to leave it as is.

In particular, payments in Lightning seldomly involve a single channel.
Using the channel = Ledger model would work if there were not hops involved within a payment in Lightning.

===== Why referring to the whole Lightning network as the Ledger

It is conceptually similar to how we see other ledgers (Bitcoin, Ethereum).
The difference is that it is a private ledger, hence not every party can see every transaction.
I feel the concept of a "private" ledger is better suited here.
With https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1862 landing, we can introduce ledgers like `lightning::Mainnet` etc.

==== What does the protocol look like?

The following diagrams assume that a negotiation protocol is in place and the parties agreed on a set of parameters.
The protocol is following the "COMIT spirit":

- readonly access to LND; COMIT is never in control of the user's funds
- moving money is explicit; COMIT emits a dedicated `redeem` action for both protocol (even though it would not be necessary for the HAN-HALight one because Alice knows the secret from the very beginning so she could just use a regular invoice)

===== HAN-HALight swap

> image::http://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/proxy?src=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/comit-network/spikes/700fd2c/assets/0022-halight-eth-ln-swap.puml&fmt=svg[HAN-HALight]

Reviewer: Good job on those diagrams. I found a few minor things.

COMIT only needs read-access to LND.
We need APIs for:

* Monitor an invoice
* Monitor an outgoing payment

===== Watching an invoice:

We need to be able to differentiate between the following states:

* Hold invoice added to LND but not paid yet (see <<HAN-HALight swap>>, cnd needs to be able detect that the invoice was added to emit the next action)
* Invoice has been paid (analogous to HTLC has been deployed)
* Invoice has been settled (analogous to HTLC has been redeemed)
* Invoice has been rejected (this does not exist on Layer 1, it would be analogous for removing the HTLC from the blockchain again)
* Invoice has timed out

NOTE: The hold invoices shows up as CANCELED in either case (timed-out or rejected)

====== Using HTTP

The API call is a simple GET request.

[source=http]
----
GET /v1/invoice/{secret-hash} HTTP/1.1
Host: LND_HOST:LND_PORT
----

Documentation: https://api.lightning.community/rest/index.html#get-v1-invoice-r_hash_str

. Advantages:
- Simple HTTP GET request

. Disadvantages:
- We have to poll regularly

====== Using gRPC

There is a dedicated gRPC call `SubscribeSingleInvoice` that allows to get a stream of changes of one invoice.

> This RPC call is behind the feature-flag `invoicesrpc` so unfortunately there is online documentation.

Reviewer: 😅
```suggestion
This RPC call is behind the feature-flag `invoicesrpc` so unfortunately there is no online documentation.
```

[source=http]
----
GET /v1/payments?include_incomplete=true HTTP/1.1
Host: LND_HOST:LND_PORT
----

Documentation: https://api.lightning.community/rest/index.html#v1-payments

. Advantages:
- Simple HTTP GET request

. Disadvantages:
- We have to poll regularly

====== Using gRPC

I couldn't find any subscription-based RPC call for outgoing payments but there is the RPC equivalent of the above HTTP call: `listpayments`

Documentation here: https://api.lightning.community/#listpayments

. Advantages
- No clear advantages

. Disadvantages
- Need to integrate gRPC and protobuf code generation in the code base

==== How to authenticate with LND?

LND provides macaroons that allow users to very precisely specify the permissions a specific client has.
Our users will have to provide a macaroon to cnd that we can use to authenticate against it.
Ideally, we can just tell the user to put the macaroon at a specific place (inside the cnd config folder) so we can automatically discover it.

==== What are the actions we need to emit on cnd's REST API?

===== `lnd-send-payment`

===== `lnd-add-hold-invoice`

===== `lnd-settle-invoice`

== Recommendation

> - should we try and integrate lightning without changing our messaging??

Reviewer: Imho yes. This would allow us to have a working feature soon on which we can then iterate. 
I know the downside of this is that _more_ code is harder to refactor.

Author: I thought about this quite a bit but decided against it. See the last section for details.

- use HTTP for communication
- start with adopting the two-ledger protocol style inside cnd with han and herc20
- set up the test infrastructure with running lightning nodes and channel opened
- start implementing the new communication protocol (other spike)

> - start with adding routes to cnd that can be called for these tests and write e2e tests that go as far as possible

Reviewer: Is this an ordered list or overall recommendations?

= Outline a plan of attack for integrating Lightning into cnd
Thomas Eizinger <thomas@coblox.tech>;
:toc:
:revdate: 2020-01-21
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 5

NOTE: Author: {authors} +
Date: {revdate} +
Tracking issue: https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1838[#1838]

== Context

We want to allow users to use Lightning for swapping assets.
This spike outlines the plan and design of how we can achieve that.

=== Problems

This section defines the problems we need to solve for a good integration of Lightning into our current software and specification.
The problems identified are:

. Swaps with Lightning are HTLC-based, yet they are different from our current swaps and we don't have a reusable concept in our spec and/or software for defining protocols per ledger
. Different messaging is required for a swap that includes Lightning vs other protocols but our messaging is not flexible enough to express that
. Lightning is not a public ledger, hence our current abstraction of watching a blockchain doesn't fit

> . The _standard_ LN as of today doesn't support paying someone who doesn't know the preimage, hence the swaps would only work in one direction (if Bob pays Alice via LN)

Reviewer 2: Wait, isn't it what `hodlinvoice` is for?

Reviewer 2: Ok now I see, maybe `standard LN` does not really apply.
I'd rephrase to 
```suggestion
. Most LN clients doesn't support paying someone who doesn't know the preimage by default, hence the swaps would only work in one direction (if Bob pays Alice via LN)
```
And even this rephrase does not capture the fact that lnd supports it with compilation flags.

> . Our current REST API is not capable of the alpha/beta ledger protocol idea

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
. Our current REST API is not capable of using separate protocol for each ledger
```

==== Messaging protocol

This problem will be solved by a different spike.
For this current one, we will make the following assumptions (which will influence the design of the new messaging):

- Adding support for the HALight protocol can be done by _adding_ libp2p protocols instead of modifying existing ones (as it is currently the case)

This should allow us to finish this spike and once the new communication protocol is defined, add support for HALight to it based on the needs that will be revealed in this spike.

==== Lightning is not a public ledger

At the moment, the implementation of the rfc003 protocol is based on the `HtlcEvents` trait.
Said trait exposes the events that can happen as part of the protocol execution.

The implementations of that make use of the `btsieve` module which cannot be used for Lightning as already mentioned above.
Hence, the integration of Lightning will likely require adding an "Events" traits, conceptually similar to `HtlcEvents`.
`HtlcEvents` is already specific to a single ledger, so we can simply add a trait `halight::Events` that describes all the events that can happen during the execution of the HALight protocol.

> Note: `HtlcEvents` will be decomposed into single function traits with https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1779[#1779].

Reviewer 2: I feel that with the introduction of HALight then the name `HtlcEvents` for HAN does not fit anymore.
Even with this new issue, I think the terminology `Htlc` is going to be confusing.
Maybe similarly to what you propose for HALight, we should update comit-network/comit-rs#1779 to create new traits which are `han::Funded` instead of `HtlcFunded`.

Author: It really depends on which issue happens first.
I'd expect everyone to follow along here good enough to get this :)

- POST `/swaps/halight/lightning/bitcoin/han/ethereum/ether`
- POST `/swaps/halight/lightning/bitcoin/herc20/ethereum/erc20`

The basic idea here is the following:

We have to supply all this information _somewhere_.
In HTTP, the combination of method, path and headers uniquely identifies a request.
From a purist point of view, all the information that determines what kind of request it is, should go in either one of these places.
The body can then take all the information that varies between different kinds of requests.

Following this reasoning, the above proposal allows us to have a static mapping between the method + path combination and the actual body.

You may have noticed some redundancy in the URL:

- HErc20 and ERC20
- HALight and Lightning

We could opt to remove this redundancy and infer the ledger from the protocol.
However, in my opinion, consistency wins here:

. these URLs are unlikely to be typed by developers (as long as the use our SDKs)
. in the future, I'd hope we expose siren actions for creating swaps, hence the developers only need to follow those actions and will therefore never see this URL anyway

=== The HALight protocol

> The HALight protocol allows us to do atomic swaps using HTLCs with assets that are tracked on lightning.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The HALight protocol allows us to do atomic swaps using HTLCs with assets that are tracked on Lightning.
```

===== Why not a single LN node

If the `Ledger` in HALight would be a single Lightning node, then doing a swap would conceptually move Bitcoin from one `Ledger` to another one which is not true.
The only thing that changes is the _ownership_ of the Bitcoin.
Referring to a single node as the `Leger` would be conceptually similar to referring to the users Bitcoin HD wallet (like a Nano Ledger S) as the `Ledger`.
We don't do it for Bitcoin, hence we should also not do it for Lightning.

===== Why not a single channel

One could conceptualize a single Lightning channel as a ledger in the way that it tracks ownership of who owns how many Bitcoins.
Using a channel would be more correct than using a single node but bears other problems.
In particular, payments in Lightning seldomly involve a single channel.
Using the channel = Ledger model would work if there were not hops involved within a payment in Lightning.

===== Why referring to the whole Lightning network as the Ledger

It is conceptually similar to how we see other ledgers (Bitcoin, Ethereum).
The difference is that it is a private ledger, hence not every party can see every transaction.

> I feel the concept of a "private" ledger is better suited here.

Reviewer 2: You can add that this creates some synergy with Grin?

With https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1862 landing, we can introduce ledgers like `lightning::Mainnet` etc.

==== What does the protocol look like?

The following diagrams assume that a negotiation protocol is in place and the parties agreed on a set of parameters.
The protocol is following the "COMIT spirit":

- readonly access to LND; COMIT is never in control of the user's funds
- moving money is explicit; COMIT emits a dedicated `redeem` action for both protocol (even though it would not be necessary for the HAN-HALight one because Alice knows the secret from the very beginning so she could just use a regular invoice)

===== HAN-HALight swap

> image::http://www.plantuml.com/plantuml/proxy?src=https://raw.githubusercontent.com/comit-network/spikes/3e474ff2/assets/0022-halight-eth-ln-swap.puml&fmt=svg[HAN-HALight]

Reviewer 2: s/protcol/protocol/

Reviewer 2: Interesting that you decided to use hodl invoice for both directions. Why?

==== Which parameters do we need to exchange for the protocol?

To make a payment in Lightning we need to know:

- the recipient pubkey
- the amount
- the secret hash
- the final-cltv-delta

The payment can then by made (using lncli):

[source=bash]
----
lncli sendpayment \
    --dest=0346093cc4b9010fa3885df8dfcb6015bc2190bc9f46f5935a48df0417eeb7667e \
    --amt=1000 \
    --payment_hash=ec4916dd28fc4c10d78e287ca5d9cc51ee1ae73cbfde08c6b37324cbfaac8bc5 \
    --final_cltv_delta=40
----

==== Which LND APIs do we need to target?

COMIT only needs read-access to LND.
We need APIs for:

* Monitor an invoice
* Monitor an outgoing payment

===== Watching an invoice

We need to be able to differentiate between the following states:

* Hold invoice added to LND but not paid yet (see <<HAN-HALight swap>>, cnd needs to be able detect that the invoice was added to emit the next action)
* Invoice has been paid (analogous to HTLC has been deployed)
* Invoice has been settled (analogous to HTLC has been redeemed)
* Invoice has been rejected (this does not exist on Layer 1, it would be analogous for removing the HTLC from the blockchain again)

> * Invoice has timed out

Reviewer 2: Can this happen if there is a pending payment on such invoice? How much do we control that?

===== `lnd-send-payment`

To send a payment through lnd, this action needs to contain the following parameters:

. recipient lnd pubkey
. amount
. secret-hash
. final-cltv-delta:
The CLTV (Check-Lock-Time-Verify) delta of the HTLC in the last hop of the payment routing.
This value is conceptually equivalent with the on-chain expiry value (it is just relative in this case).

===== `lnd-add-hold-invoice`

Adds a new hold invoice to lnd.
This action could return up to four parameters:

. amount
. secret-hash
. expiry:
This allows us to specify, for how long we are willing to accept a payment for this invoice.
The default here is 3600 seconds, e.g. 1 hour.
We should return sensible values here, depending on the roles and the protocol that is used on the other chain.
If this timeout is too short, Bob might not be able to pay the invoice in the X-HALight case even though we would like to proceed with the swap.
For the HALight-X case, this would allow Bob to specify a time window up until he would like Alice to start the swap.
In this case, the timeout should not be too long, otherwise the absolute expiry of his HTLC (assuming a HAN-protocol) is not enough for a secure swap.
. memo

> We can return a description that says something like "COMIT atomic swap {swap-id} with {peer-id}" to make identifying invoices of swaps easier for the user.

Reviewer 2: FYI, max size is 639 bytes (I guess we are fine) https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lightning-rfc/blob/master/11-payment-encoding.md#tagged-fields

===== `lnd-settle-invoice`

Settles a hold invoice.
This action needs only one parameter:

. secret

== Recommendation

Integrating Lightning requires effort on several fronts at the same time.
This section proposed various steps we can take to parallelize this as much as possible.
At the same time, emphasis is put on spending our time in a "smart" way, that is, not spending too much effort on code that is already known to be replaced.

I see three main areas in which progress can be made in parallel:

. The e2e test suite
. The support for Lightning inside cnd
. The messaging protocol

=== The e2e test suite

To know when we are done with integrating Lightning, we should start with extending our e2e test suite with the respective tests.
Our e2e test suite is in a limbo state at the moment, hence the first step is to get this sorted.

. Make the e2e tests run in parallel: https://github.com/comit-network/comit-rs/issues/1927 (including the dependencies)

> . Setup up the test infrastructure to start an LND instance per actor and open a channel between them

Reviewer 2: It would be interesting to add an edge case with `Alice -- Charlie -- Bob` channel topography.

Reviewer: Good point. Maybe don't even call it edge case but default. At the end I think it is more likely that there is someone between Alice and Bob than that there is a direct connection between the two.

While not strictly necessary for integrating Lightning, this is a good opportunity to extend our software(-suite) with capabilities that allows us to deprecate parts of the API.
. Once the inner workings for cnd are adopted to the new two-protocol approach, we can start implementing the HALight protocol next to it.
For the communication with LND, I would recommend to use HTTP for monitoring invoices and outgoing payments.
Even though this requires us to use polling, the integration is much simpler as we don't have to bring in and get familiar with a gRPC stack.

=== The messaging protocol

This spike doesn't go into detail on what the new communication protocol looks like.
However, I'd recommend to not follow an iterative approach but rather implement it as a separate crate on the side and drop it in as a replacement for the current protocol once it is ready.
Once the new communication protocol is in, we can add the necessary messages for Lightning to make more progress on that.

Given the above recommendations, we can specify the following requirements for the new communication protocol:

. Both parties need to know about the pubkeys of their lnd instances

> . Both parties need knowledge about the final cltv delta

Reviewer 2: I believe this is configurable on lnd. It'd be good to clarify this part.

Reviewer 2: This should be verified as part of the `haLight::events` (deployed).
